Anti-football

Anti-football , also known colloquially as haramball , is a playing style in association football that emphasises a highly defensive approach, relying mainly on passing, set-pieces and involving the deployment of all team members except the striker behind the ball. The goal of the tactic is to prevent the opposing team from scoring, rather than pursuing an offensive strategy to win the game. Managers known for such tactics include Massimiliano Allegri , José Bordalás , Sean Dyche , Antonio Conte , José Mourinho , Diego Simeone and Mikel Arteta . Managers accused of playing anti-football usually deny using such tactics, though Walter Smith openly admitted to using anti-football tactics at Rangers following criticism from Lionel Messi after Messi's Barcelona drew 0–0 away in the UEFA Champions League (UCL) with Rangers.

The term is also used to describe teams that intentionally prevent the game from progressing by kicking the ball forward without attempting to reach any players, engaging in acts of diving or time-wasting, and kicking the ball away during free kicks. By doing so the teams aim to stifle progression by the opponent and reduce the amount of time the ball is in action. Many of these actions often result in a yellow card by the referee.

UEFA , the governing body of football in Europe , offers a fair play prize to teams that prioritise fair play, including avoiding anti-football tactics. Teams that seek to "unlock" the game by playing offensively, taking risks, retaining possession and avoiding fouls, receive higher fair play scores. The three highest-rated teams in Europe automatically qualified for the Europa League from 1995 to the 2014–15 season. They continue to receive a monetary reward for their fair play. Although many have criticized such pragmatic tactics over the years, some managers like Mourinho, Allegri and Simeone have achieved success with their tactics while also gaining a cult following.

History and usage

The term "anti-football" has been used in English since at least 2001, when Gary Armstrong and Richard Giulianotti used it in their book Fear and Loathing in World Football to describe the tactics of Argentine club Estudiantes de La Plata during the 1968 Copa Intercontinental . They cited a 1968 editorial in the Argentine sports magazine El Gráfico that had used the phrase.

Arsenal 's Cesc Fàbregas used the phrase to describe the style of play in the English Premier League after a frustrating 1–0 defeat to West Ham United . In 2007, Fàbregas had a heated exchange with fellow ex-Barcelona player, Blackburn Rovers manager Mark Hughes , who defended his team's style of play.

During their run to the 2008 UEFA Cup Final , Rangers manager Walter Smith deployed an ultra-defensive strategy dubbed " Watenaccio " (a reference to the defensive system Catenaccio , which was popularised in the 1960s in Italian football). The tactics drew criticism from opposition players, including Barcelona's Lionel Messi , who described them as "anti-football" after failing to score against Rangers in a 0–0 draw.

In 2010, Johan Cruyff applied the term "anti-football" to the style of play used by the Netherlands in the FIFA World Cup final against Spain . He criticised the Dutch team for renouncing their commitment to attacking and entertaining football and for playing "dirty". Other commentators had already described the Dutch style of play during the tournament as "anti-football".

Vietnam manager Henrique Calisto used the phrase "anti-football" after his team's defeat to the Philippines at the 2010 AFF Suzuki Cup group stage in Vietnam.

After Belgium 's defeat to France in the semi-finals of the 2018 FIFA World Cup , Belgium goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois accused the French team of playing "anti-football" for their defensive tactics despite having significantly more shots on goal and less possession than Belgium. He later apologised for the comments.

The term "haramball" originated on social media in the early 2020s. It is mainly used alongside Photoshop edits or AI generated videos of managers' faces onto infamous terrorists or dictators, particularly after a bad run of results, a boring performance or a fixture with another team accused of playing with anti-football techniques (such as the 2026 UEFA Champions League semi-final fixture between Atlético Madrid and Arsenal). It is also usually associated with the Nasheed Al-Qawlu Qawlu Sawarim. Another common trend is where users on social media would combine names of managers who are accused of playing anti-football with names of controversial figures. An example of this is the combination of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta becoming Artetanyahu, or Atletico Madrid manager Diego Simeone and Osama bin Laden becoming Simeone bin Laden .

The opposite term, " Halalball ", emerged simultaneously and is used to describe a highly attacking style of football that is regarded by many fans as more entertaining to watch. Managers known for such tactics include Luis Enrique , Pep Guardiola , Jürgen Klopp , Hansi Flick , and Vincent Kompany .

The equivalent term "anti-calcio" in Italian is attested at least as far back as 1970.

Association football portal

Parking the bus

Association football tactics

Total Football

UEFA fairplay prize